operative-vaginal-deliveryJulie S. MoldenhauerBy , MD, The Center for Fetal Diagnosis and Treatment, Children's Hospital of PhiladelphiaIndications for forceps delivery and vacuum extraction are essentially the same:Prolonged 2nd stage of labor (from full cervical dilation until delivery of the fetus)Suspicion of fetal compromise (eg, abnormal heart rate pattern)Need to shorten the 2nd stage for maternal benefit—eg, if maternal cardiac dysfunction (eg, left-to-right shunting) or neurologic disorders (eg, spinal cord trauma) contraindicate pushing or maternal exhaustion prevents effective pushingA prolonged 2nd stage is defined as follows (1):In nulliparous women: Lack of continuing progress for 4 h with a regional anesthetic or 3 h without a regional anestheticIn multiparous women: Lack of continuing progress for 3 h with a regional anesthetic or 2 h without a regional anestheticChoice of device depends largely on user preference and operator experience and varies greatly. These procedures are used when the station of the fetal head is low (2 cm below the maternal ischial spines [station +2] or lower); then, minimal traction or rotation is required to deliver the head.Before starting an operative vaginal delivery, the clinician should do the following:Confirm complete cervical dilationConfirm an engaged fetal vertex at station +2 or lowerConfirm rupture of membranesConfirm that fetal position is compatible with operative vaginal deliveryDrain the maternal bladderClinically assess pelvic dimensions (clinical pelvimetry) to determine whether the pelvis is adequateAlso required are informed consent, adequate support and personnel, and adequate analgesia or anesthesia. Neonatal care providers should be alerted to the mode of delivery so they can be ready to treat any neonatal complications.Contraindications include unengaged fetal head, unknown fetal position, and certain fetal disorders such as hemophilia. Vacuum extraction is typically considered contraindicated in preterm pregnancies of < 34 wk because risk of intraventricular hemorrhage is increased.Major complications are maternal and fetal injuries and hemorrhage, particularly if the operator is inexperienced or if candidates are not appropriately chosen. Significant perineal trauma and neonatal bruising are more common with forceps delivery; shoulder dystocia, cephalohematoma, jaundice, and retinal bleeding are more common with vacuum-assisted delivery.1. Spong CY, Berghella V, Wenstrom KD, et al: Preventing the first cesarean delivery: Summary of a joint Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, Society for Maternal-Fetal Medicine, and American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists Workshop. Obstet Gynecol 120 (5):1181–1193, 2012. doi: http://10.1097/AOG.0b013e3182704880.Merck & Co., Inc., Kenilworth, NJ, USA (known as MSD outside of the US and Canada) is a global healthcare leader working to help the world be well. From developing new therapies that treat and prevent disease to helping people in need, we are committed to improving health and well-being around the world.  The Manual was first published in 1899 as a service to the community.  The legacy of this great resource continues as the Merck Manual in the US and Canada and the MSD Manual outside of North America.  Learn more about our commitment to Global Medical Knowledge.